Outer Space Treaty

The Outer Space Treaty, or the “Treaty on Principles Governing the Activities of States in the Exploration and Use of Outer Space, including the Moon and Other Celestial Bodies,” as it is fully known, was signed on October 10 1967. 

It is largely seen as the backbone for all international space law: establishing the moon as the common heritage of mankind; that no weapons of mass destruction could be launched into orbit; that countries must avoid harmfully contaminating celestial bodies and countries must ensure space material they bring back does not contaminate earth; and nations should be held accountable for their actions in space. 

105 countries have ratified the treaty and 23 others are signatories. Yet, as private companies look towards mining opportunities on the moon and other celestial bodies, law experts have begun debating the interpretation of this treaty—the treaty says no “nation” may appropriate the moon or other celestial bodies, nobody said anything about private companies. 

Rescue Agreement

The Rescue Agreement was signed at the height of the Space Race on TK DATE and was a rare moment of cooperation in the backdrop of two earthly superpowers vying to dominate the heavens. While the agreement was signed in TK YEAR, aspects of the agreement existed in piecemeal in various earlier agreements and treaties. Indeed the 1963 Declaration of Principles ensured that “astronauts [were] envoys of mankind” and shall be given “all possible assistance in the event of accident, distress, or emergency landing on the territory of a foreign State or on the high seas.”  The second part of the rescue agreement pertains to returning objects found in space to its rightful owners, but such a clause was also present in the Outer Space Treaty signed TK TIME earlier. Yet, the United States and the Soviet Union realized the necessity of protecting astronauts and recovering space objects and formalized this with its own treaty formalizing these piecemeal principles into the “Rescue Agreement.” 


Space Liability Convention

The Space Liability Convention was signed in 1972, and as the name of the convention indicates, ensures nations take responsibility for the hulks of steel they propel into the night skies. In 1978, a nuclear-powered Soviet satellite Kosmos 954 crashed into Canadian territory and is the only claim filed under this convention, despite the fact that nearly 2,000 satellites orbit the earth today. And while satellites have been known to fall from the sky, evading responsibility is nothing a good lawyer cant help you with. 




Registration Convention

The Registration Convention was signed on TK DATE 1974 and went into force in 1976. The  convention requires states furnish details about the orbit of each space object to the United Nations.


Moon Treaty

The Moon Agreement has been signed and ratified with the least number of states for any UN Treaty or Convention on Outer Space. Only 18 countries have ratified it and 4 other are signatures. The treaty tried to establish the moon and other celestial bodies can be used in a manner similar to the Convention on the Law of the Sea. The treaty would ban military use of celestial bodies, ban the exploration and use of celestial bodies without the approval of other states, require the Secretary-General to be notified of celestial activities and discoveries, declare states have equal right to conduct research in space, among other things. Needless to say the restrictions and oversight proposed by the treaty did not go down with dominant space-faring nations, and the United States and Russia are notably absent from the agreement. 